# Informatics_jobs
An evaluation of health informatics jobs posted on Indeed highlights the most typical required skills and certifications.

I was recently asked in an interview about my advice for students in the health informatics field. That question made me reflect on my experience prospecting for a job. I noticed that many industry roles in informatics have specific requirements that can make it challenging for new graduates to qualify. It became clear that there is a gap between student training expectations and the skills and certifications demanded by industry roles. While training for a career in academia is precious, it can leave graduates less equipped for industry positions, which are more abundant than academic ones.
Additionally, many roles now require specific licenses and certifications, often favoring those with backgrounds or prior experience, such as clinical work. For instance, specific Epic certifications are only available to those with clinical expertise, limiting opportunities for those with that background. Recognizing this trend, I decided to analyze job postings to quantify how common these barriers are and better understand the industry's demands.

For this analysis, I retrieved data from Indeed using the keywords "Health Informatics," "Medical Informatics," and "Clinical Informatics." Due to budget constraints, I accessed data for 500 jobs posted in the last two months on the platform using free credits from Apify's Indeed scraper. After retrieving the data, I cleaned it by filtering out irrelevant listings, retaining only those where the job title or description included terms like 'health informatics,' 'clinical informatics,' 'medical informatics,' 'health informaticist,' 'clinical informaticist,' 'medical informaticist,' 'health informatician,' 'clinical informatician,' or 'medical informatician.'  I started by filtering relevant job listings from a dataset using critical terms related to informatics roles, such as "health informatics," "clinical informatics," and similar terms. Next, I used Named Entity Recognition (NER) with a pre-trained transformer model to extract skills and certifications from the job descriptions. I split each description into sentences, tokenized them, and passed them through the NER pipeline to identify relevant entities. To ensure a comprehensive extraction, I supplemented this process with regular expressions (regex) to capture additional skills and certifications. I then manually cleaned, standardized, and aggregated this data to display the most common skills and certifications required across the job postings. Finally, I visualized the distribution of skills and certifications using bar charts showing the top 5 most requested certifications, skills, and knowledge. For certifications and licenses, the most required are nursing licenses and Epic certifications, while skills and knowledge, data science, clinical knowledge, ontologies and standards knowledge, and NLP skills were the most required. 
To better prepare students for the industry, there is a need to include awareness of and access to these certifications during the program. Making internships and externships across various industry roles should also be an integral part of the programs.  
